---
title: "List all ignored files in git"
description: "Discover an easy way to list all ignored files in git with one simple command."
author: "Anton Ohorodnyk"
date: "2023-06-10T15:00:53-07:00"
type: "post"
---
## Preamble

Recently, I've been working on a project where I, as usual, vendored my Golang dependencies by `go mod vendor` command. I then added these files to git and pushed them to the remote repository.

However, I noticed that the CI/CD pipeline was failing due to the presence of these files. I was puzzled as to why this was happening. I then realized that some files or directories were being ignored by git, and I had to find out which ones.

## The Method

I was aware of the `git status --ignored` command, but it didn't provide the desired output. I wanted to see the list of ignored files and directories, but the command only showed the ignored files that were already tracked by git. I needed to see all ignored files, including the untracked ones.

I then discovered the `git ls-files --others --ignored --exclude-standard` command, which did exactly what I wanted. It listed all ignored files and directories, including the untracked ones. Where I could then see the files and directories that were being ignored by a `.gitignore` file generated by `gitignore.io`.

## Epilogue

In troubleshooting a CI/CD hiccup during Golang dependency vendoring, a routine process led to unexpected complexities. Conventional Git commands fell short, prompting the discovery of git ls-files --others --ignored --exclude-standard. The culprit? A dynamically generated .gitignore from gitignore.io. This incident is a reminder of the dynamic nature of development workflows, where routine tasks can unearth unforeseen challenges, paving the way for continual learning.
